Everything on earth
is made from fewer than one hundred
naturally occurring elements,
such as oxygen,
carbon,
calcium,
and iron.
How are such elements formed?
Many are created inside of stars,
where tremendous heat and pressure
cause atoms to fuse together.
Stars like our sun fuse hydrogen,
the lightest element,
to form helium,
a heavier element.
Helium fuses to make carbon.
As a star progressively forms
heavier elements,
it becomes larger.
Its core becomes hotter and denser.
Eventually, the core collapses on itself
and the star explodes,
becoming a supernova.
A supernova forms even heavier elements
and shoots them into space.
The Bible does not describe exactly
how Jehovah formed the earth.
But Jehovah ensured that earth contains
all of the elements needed for life.
“When I see your heavens,
the works of your fingers,
“the moon and the stars
that you have prepared,
“what is mortal man
that you keep him in mind,
and a son of man
that you take care of him?”
The atmosphere
—one of earth’s amazing life-support systems—
its mix of gases sustains life.
It insulates the earth
and prevents temperature extremes
that could destroy life.
It protects
against most life-threatening radiation
and objects from space.
Living things
both depend on the atmosphere
and contribute to it.
When people and animals breathe,
they absorb oxygen and put carbon dioxide
back into the air.
Plants absorb carbon dioxide
and release oxygen.
Nonliving systems also help
to renew and to protect the atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide trapped in rocks is recycled
into the air when volcanos erupt.
Earth’s gravity holds the atmosphere
close to the surface.
And its magnetic field
may prevent solar winds
from eroding the atmosphere into space.
The earth,
our well-supplied and well-protected home,
is indeed a loving gift.
“As for the heavens,
they belong to Jehovah,
but the earth he has given
to the sons of men.”
Of all plant life on earth,
the most abundant is grass.
Found on every continent,
it covers more than one third of the planet.
Grass serves as food.
Nearly 70 percent of all agricultural land
grows grass crops.
Grass provides shelter.
Bamboo, a type of grass,
can grow taller than 40 meters,
or 131 feet.
This makes it a popular building material.
Grass can be clothing.
It’s in our lives almost every day.
Grass is just one of many plants
that Jehovah created to meet our needs.
These are mentioned by name
at Genesis 1:12.
“And the earth began to produce grass,
“seed-bearing plants
“and trees yielding fruit along with seed,
“according to their kinds.
Then God saw that it was good.”
Temperatures in the Arctic
can drop to minus 50 degrees Celsius,
or minus 58 degrees Fahrenheit.
The polar bear, however,
maintains its body temperature
at around 37 degrees Celsius,
or 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit.
It is a marvel of thermal engineering.
The transparent hairs of a polar bear
scatter the sun’s visible light,
making them appear white.
Ultraviolet rays are trapped in the fur.
The bear’s black skin helps it
to absorb that captured heat.
Oils in its fur also help
to keep the bear warm and dry.
From extreme temperatures
to extreme depths,
the Mariana Trench in the Pacific
is deeper than earth’s tallest mountains.
Creatures survive here
despite perpetual darkness
and the crushing weight of the waters.
Fish living at extreme depths
have a highly concentrated chemical
in their cells that keeps proteins
and membranes working properly.
God has marvelously equipped
these and other animals.
What does this say
about our own value in God’s eyes?
“Observe intently the birds of heaven;
“they do not sow seed or reap
or gather into storehouses,
“yet your heavenly Father feeds them.
Are you not worth more than they are?”
From the moment we are born,
we experience the world through our senses.
Touch lets us feel safe and loved.
We use it to explore and learn.
The sounds we hear convey meaning.
With two ears,
we can locate a sound’s direction.
Different wavelengths of light
are perceived as a range of vivid colors.
Images from each eye combine in 3-D
so that we can better judge
depth and distance.
We can detect over ten thousand smells
by using a small group of cells
that detect microscopic materials in the air.
We taste,
see, smell,
touch, and hear
in one enjoyable experience,
with all the senses converging in one place
—our brain.
Some two hundred billion nerve cells
are connected by trillions of tiny contacts.
The brain interprets
chemical signals from each sense,
connects new information
to what we already know,
and stores lasting memories.
Life is a precious gift
from our loving Creator.
King David was inspired to write:
“I praise you
because in an awe-inspiring way
“I am wonderfully made.
“Your works are wonderful,
I know this very well.”